Behind me lies London City Airport, built on the old harbor in East London.
They are building a new control tower here to replace the 30 year old
and to make room for expansion
But there are no people in this new tower.
It only a high mast with a lot of cameras.
The people are 130 km away.
- We're here in the London City ops room. Which will be commissioned in January 2020.
And from here we will guide the air traffic from London City.
London City does not have much space.
So the footprint that is recorded by this mast
is considerably smaller than that of a traditional tower.
The digital tower can be cheaper and is significantly easier to build.
You do not need functionality that you would need if there are people in it.
There are therefore no relaxation areas, kitchens, toilets.
Through the use of additions to the screen,
we can show a plane with its radar number while flying over the screen.
They can see the call code, speed and altitude.
We have pa-tilt-zoom cameras here
In theory you can even look straight into the sun to follow planes
flying to the south.
You can not do that with binoculars, but with this system.
This is a 360 degree panorama which is compressed in 225 degrees.
This has the advantage for the controller that it does not
have to look over his shoulder when something is flying behind him.
You can see the lighting of planes coming this way from 20-25km
The visibility of this system is much better than with the naked eye.
The data is compressed on location.
And then by a few large pipelines pushed to Swanwick.
We specify a delay of less than 1 second,
that is the same amount of delay we have for speech communication with the pilots.
- At the moment the new control room is used for training.
The camera mast is not yet made, so they use previously filmed material
from a tap, a few months ago.
Digital control towers are already being used at smaller airports.
But this is the first in a big city
and with this level of air traffic.
Something like this should not only be flawless
there must also be no risks.
- Every controller is conservative by nature.
For that reason they keep a "what if" in their mind.
What if the screen goes down, what if the image falls away?
What if a camera fails.
All these things have been included in the design.
At the top of the screens is a "wake-up indicator"
If it is quiet during the day
and there is not much traffic
then you know that you are still looking at the airport
and not to a stuck picture of the airport.
If you lose a screen, the system is smart enough
to recognize that
the system will send that picture to a spare screen
and rearrange all other images so that the controller has a suitable image again.
Then a technician can come and replace the screen in about 5 to 10 minutes.
If a camera fails, we can use the pan-tilt-zoom camera at the top of the screen.
It can replicate the image of a normal camera.
When it rains, there is an air compressor that blows away the rain.
There is bird protection on top and there are heating elements in it
the image is then not foggy or frozen in winter.
if the cameras fall out completely,
then we manage the transition as if there is thick fog.
There are still a number of backup routes.
We have separate speech communication with the airport
Controllers can not see anything in the fog, you lose the cameras
and we then slowly make the same transition.
We use different data feeds.
They come from the mast, 1 goes to the east, the other to the west.
They are not on the public internet and they do not go into the cloud.
They do not go through the same pipes.
They are robust and secure.
- I do not want this to sound like a sponsored video.
That's not it.
But after my visit to the new control center,
there is a part of my brain
who is convinced that it works and is safe.
Given the additions to the screen and the extra height
it might be safer than the old tower.
But it does not feel that good and I do not really have a good reason why not.
It often happens that you think "This does not feel right"
And that can be a reason not to do something.
A bad relationship, walking into a dark alley in the evening;
your brain is good at avoiding things that are not good for you.
But aviation is something that is so far from the day-to-day reality
and where safety is so important
that you can not rule it with a bad feeling.
The evidence is solid.
And if I'm on a flight by 2020 that leaves from here,
then I will certainly swing at the cameras when we leave.
Please tell me we have that!